# RFC: Right-to-Left support

## Status

- Start Date: 2019-02-12
- RFC PR: TBD

## Summary

The standard way to style components depending on the text directionality using `[dir="ltr"]` doesn't work in the context of shadow DOM. This proposal introduces support for the `:dir()` pseudo-class to support styling components based on text direction in a shadow compliant way.

## Motivation

Support for Right-to-Left (RTL) text is part of the HTML specification. The direction of the text for display can be set via the `dir` attribute on:
- the root `html` tag to set the base direction of the page
- or on any HTML element to set the text direction on a specific subtree

In order style elements in the pages based on the text direction, developers used to CSS attribute selectors `dir` attribute selector. For example:

```css
.menu-item {
    float: left;
}

[dir="rtl"] .menu-item {
    float: right;
}
```

While this works great for standard HTML pages, it doesn't work as is in the context of Shadow DOM since the `dir` attribute may not be present in the shadow tree.

## Proposal

Adding support for the [directionality pseudo-class `:dir()`][MDN page] in the LWC compiler would allow developers to style the components based on directionality in a way that is compliant with the Shadow DOM encapsulation. It accepts 1 direction argument that can either be `ltr` or `rtl`. It allows others to match against elements based on its directionality. Note that this selector doesn't match against the stylistic direction defined via the `position` CSS property.

This pseudo selector is defined as part of the [Selectors Level 4 W3C Working Draft][Selector Level 4 spec]. The selector is currently supported natively by Gecko, and is currently under discussion for [Wekbit][Webkit issue] and [Blink][Blink issue]. While this selector is not natively supported in Blink, the Polymer [uses the `:dir()` pseudo-class][Polymer direction based selector] for direction based styling.

```css
.menu-item {
    float: left;
}

:dir(rtl) .menu-item {
    float: right;
}
```

In some cases, CSS is not enough to style components depending on the text direction. In the context of dropdowns and modals elements positioning is done via Javascript and depending on the directionality the position of the elements need to be changed. Because the directionality of an element can be [influenced by multiple factors][Directionality computation of an element] and also because browsers don't provide a standard API to get the directionality, LWC will not expose a specific API to get the directionality of a component. Component authors can access the directionality in multiple ways without the intervention of the framework.

```js
// Option 1: Accessing base direction from the page
function getBaseDirection() {
    const html = document.documentElement;
    return html.getAttribute('dir') === 'rtl' ? 'rtl' : 'ltr';
}

// Option 2: Access inherited component direction
import { LightningElement } from 'lwc';

export default class TextDirection extends LightningElement {
    connectedCallback() {
        // Wait for a RAF to avoid layout trashing
        requestAnimationFrame(() => {
            const { direction } = window.getComputedStyle(this.template.host);
            console.log('Component direction :', direction);
        });
    }
}
```

## Detailed design

There are multiple aspects here to take into account when it comes to supporting the `:dir()` selector in LWC:
* it should work in both native and synthetic Shadow DOM
* it should be polyfilled on all the browsers since Blink and Webkit don't implement this selector.

In order to accommodate the requirements, this proposal uses a CSS transformation done at compile time and a runtime polyfill. This approach is similar to the [Polymer `DirMixin`](Polymer dir mixin) one.

### CSS transformation

Since support for the `:host-context()` pseudo-class selector has been dropped in LWC, the only to style a component dynamically is via the addition of the class or an attribute on the host element. This class or attribute can then be consumed via the `:host()` pseudo-class selector from within the shadow tree. During compilation the all the `:dir(rtl)` pseudo-class selectors will be transformed in `:host([dir="rtl"])` pseudo-class selectors.

```css
/* Original */
:dir(rtl) p {
    float: right;
}

/* Transformed */
:host([dir="rtl"]) p {
    float: right;
}
```

Adding the `dir` attribute on all the host elements even in the case where the `dir` is set to `ltr` will is too expensive. The usage of `:dir(ltr)` should make the compiler warn or error.

### Runtime polyfill

Then at runtime, the engine will in charge of adding a `MutationObserver` on the document element listening for changes to the `dir` attribute. If it changes, the engine will then be in charge of reflecting the changes on all the impacted host elements.

## Drawbacks

- **Polyfill related**:
    - **Direction has to be set at the application level**: Adding the `dir` attribute in a subtree will not be honored since the framework would take over the `dir` attribute on the host element.

- **Spec related**:
    - **Lack of progress from the Blink and Webkit team in the implementation of the `:dir()` pseudo-class**: The [Wekbit issue][Webkit issue] and [Blink issue][Blink issue] doesn't show any major progress on the implementation of this selector since 2016.
    - **Open questions about direction behavior in the context of Shadow DOM**: There is still [open question][Discussion about direction inheritance model in Shadow DOM] about how the direction should be inherited in the context of Shadow DOM.

## Alternative

* **Transforming `:dir(rtl) p` to `[dir="html"] p`**: This approach works well in the context on synthetic shadow DOM but break with the native one.

## How we teach this ?

RTL support is a fairly advanced use case, so for most users, they won't encounter this feature at all. Even if the selector doesn't happen to be implemented by some browser vendors we can keep the polyfill in place.

We can add a section in the component styling section of the developer guide to cover this.


[MDN page]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/:dir
[Selector Level 4 spec]: https://www.w3.org/TR/selectors-4/#the-dir-pseudo
[Directionality computation of an element]: https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/dom.html#the-directionality

[Webkit issue]: https://bugs.webkit.org/show_bug.cgi?id=64861
[Blink issue]: https://bugs.chromium.org/p/chromium/issues/detail?id=576815
[Discussion about direction inheritance model in Shadow DOM]: https://github.com/whatwg/html/issues/3699

[Polymer dir mixin]: https://github.com/Polymer/polymer/blob/aba0f9049fb43d50b068e01e2751ef274cab1dd1/lib/mixins/dir-mixin.js
[Polymer direction based selector]: https://polymer-library.polymer-project.org/3.0/docs/devguide/style-shadow-dom#style-directional-text-with-the-dir-selector
